{:layout "post", :title "Passing the time"}

When I was 17 years old, my Nan died. She was very old (97) and in
many ways her death was welcome - she'd been suffering from Alzheimers
disease for several years, probably longer. Her death affected me in
strange ways, mostly because she'd lived with us for my whole life to
that point. As she fell into infirmity, my mother had more or less
sacrificed her own life to take care of her, or so it seemed to me.

My mum asked me to play my violin at the funeral. In my youth I was an
accomplished violinist, and this was at the height of my musical
career. After I left school a year or so later, I began a gradual and
accelerating decline.

But let's not dwell on that. Mum wanted me to play at her mother's
funeral, and as far as I was concerned there was no-one else whose
thoughts on the subject mattered at all. Of course I would play.

On the eve of the funeral, my then girlfriend, Anne Marie, called and
ended our 1+ year relationship - my first serious relationship. I was
devastated. I went out with my good friend Andrew to the pub and drank
away the crazy incomprehensible pile of wrong.

I played the last movement of Bach's Sonata for solo violin in A
minor. I killed it (so to speak). My violin wept for us all and our
short, pitiful existences. It was perhaps the darkest moment of my
life to date, mourning a death, confronting my own rejection and
inevitable loneliness, and all in the grip of a callous pulsating
hangover. If you know the piece, you'll understand how perfect it was.

Today I found out that my mum is most likely dying. We don't know a
lot yet, but what we do know is very bad. Tonight, a lot of memories
have been bubbling up into my thoughts. I had forgotten about that
performance I gave way back when, but it somehow captures in a single
memory the challenge that's before me.

I don't mean to understate the challenge that's before my sister, and
oh god, my poor frightened mum. But I can't be inside their heads.

On Sunday I fly home to Leeds.